# Solomon_etal
Data and scripts for forthcoming Leishmaniasis paper (in submission).

### Abstract
**Background:** Visceral leishmaniasis (VL, or kala-azar) is a major cause of disability and death, especially in East Africa. Its vectors, phlebotomine sand flies, are poorly controlled and guarded against in these regions, owing in part to a lack of understanding about their feeding behavior. 

**Methodology/Principle Findings:** Statistical analysis of vector blood-meal data was applied to measure the risk of being bitten by vectors of leishmaniasis when exposed to domestic-animal reservoir hosts of leishmania parasites. A total of 746 freshly fed female sand flies were collected in five population centers in Kafta Humera (northwestern Ethiopia), where VL is endemic. Sources of sand fly blood meals were identified using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) and DNA amplification with reverse-line blot analysis (PCR-RLB). The impact of exposure to different species of domestic animal on human risks of sand fly bites was calculated using logistic regression. The same analysis was performed on previously published data from 637 sand fly specimens from nearby Tahtay Adiyabo. In Kafta Humera, where blood meals from cows were 1.4 times more common than those from humans, sand flies exposed to cattle fed on humans at 2.5 times the rate of those not exposed to cattle. However, in Tahtay Adiyabo, where cattle blood meals were 3.7 more numerous than those from humans, sand flies exposed to cattle fed on humans 0.31 times as frequently as those not exposed to cattle. Analyses of exposure to all livestock match those from cattle exposure, which had the greatest effect on odds ratios of biting risks for humans. Additional observations on habitat and host preferences of various sand fly species confirmed the finding of previous reports that the main vector in the region, Phlebotomus orientalis, is a highly opportunistic feeder that prefers large animals and is most commonly found at village peripheries.

**Conclusions:** Our study strongly suggests a reexamination of previous literature on the impact of phlebotomine sand fly feeding behavior. Rather than supporting a single zoopotentiative or zooprophylactic hypothesis, we found a more nuanced relationship between domestic animals and feeding behavior. We hypothesize that flies are highly attracted to cows and donkeys but also bite accompanying humans when livestock numbers are insufficient to meet feeding demands. Future VL control programs should take into account the number of large livestock, especially cattle, around villages when considering interventions to prevent VL exposure.
